docs: ADR-038 plugin proposal (#10482)
cosmos/cosmos-sdk: docs/architecture/adr-038-state-listening.md

	}

	// Call the streaming service hooks with the DeliverTx messages
	for _, listener := range app.abciListeners {
		listener.ListenDeliverTx(app.deliverState.ctx, req, res)
	}

	return res
}
```

#### Plugin system

> We will load and run different `StreamingService` implementations as plugins.
> We will introduce a plugin loading/preloading system that is used to load, initialize, inject, run, and stop Cosmos-SDK
> plugins. We will define a base `Plugin` interface for use with this plugin loading/preloading system.
> This base interface is extended to create plugins of different kinds.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We propose a plugin architecture to load and run `StreamingService` implementations.
We will introduce a plugin loading/preloading system that is used to load, initialize, inject, run, and stop Cosmos-SDK
plugins. Each plugin must implement the following interface:
```

	// The plugin is passed the AppOptions for configuration
	// A plugin will not necessarily have a functional Init
	Init(env serverTypes.AppOptions) error

	// Closer interface for shutting down the plugin process
	io.Closer
}
```

The `Name` method returns a plugin's name.
The `Version` method returns a plugin's version.
The `Init` method initializes a plugin with the provided `AppOptions`.
The io.Closer is used to shut down the plugin service.

For the purposes of this ADR we introduce a single kind of plugin- a state streaming plugin.
We will define a `StateStreaming` plugin interface which extends the above `Plugin` interface to support a state streaming service.

```go
// StateStreaming interface for plugins that load a baseapp.StreamingService onto a baseapp.BaseApp
type StateStreaming interface {
	// Register configures and registers the plugin streaming service with the BaseApp
	Register(bApp *baseapp.BaseApp, marshaller codec.BinaryCodec, keys map[string]*types.KVStoreKey) error

	// Start starts the background streaming process of the plugin streaming service
	Start(wg *sync.WaitGroup)

	// Plugin is the base Plugin interface
	Plugin

> }

Reviewer: shouldn't the `StateStreaming` have a writer methods?

Author: `StateStreaming` plugin uses the `Register` method to register `StreamingService`(s) with the `BaseApp`, the `StreamingService` interface exposes `WriteListener`(s) that have the `OnWrite` method. So in other words, the writing interface is buried two levels down. Let me see if I can restructure this so that it is more clear where writing is occurring.

	...

	// this loads the preloaded and any plugins found in `plugins.dir`
	pluginLoader, err := loader.NewPluginLoader(appOpts, logger)
	if err != nil {

>         tmos.Exit(err.Error())

Reviewer: Do we need to use `tmos` in these examples?

    }

	// initialize the loaded plugins
	if err := pluginLoader.Initialize(); err != nil {
		tmos.Exit(err.Error())
    }

	keys := sdk.NewKVStoreKeys(
		authtypes.StoreKey, banktypes.StoreKey, stakingtypes.StoreKey,
		minttypes.StoreKey, distrtypes.StoreKey, slashingtypes.StoreKey,
		govtypes.StoreKey, paramstypes.StoreKey, ibchost.StoreKey, upgradetypes.StoreKey,
		evidencetypes.StoreKey, ibctransfertypes.StoreKey, capabilitytypes.StoreKey,
	)

	// register the plugin(s) with the BaseApp
	if err := pluginLoader.Inject(bApp, appCodec, keys); err != nil {
		tmos.Exit(err.Error())
    }

	// start the plugin services, optionally use wg to synchronize shutdown using io.Closer
	wg := new(sync.WaitGroup)
	if err := pluginLoader.Start(wg); err != nil {
		tmos.Exit(err.Error())
    }

	...

	return app
}
```

#### Configuration

The plugin system will be configured within an app's app.toml file.

```toml
[plugins]
    on = false # turn the plugin system, as a whole, on or off
    disabled = ["list", "of", "plugin", "names", "to", "disable"]

>     dir = "the directory to load non-preloaded plugins from; defaults to "

Reviewer: default is missing.

        [plugins.streaming.file] # the specific parameters for the file streaming service plugin
            keys = ["list", "of", "store", "keys", "we", "want", "to", "expose", "for", "this", "streaming", "service"]
            writeDir = "path to the write directory"
            prefix = "optional prefix to prepend to the generated file names"
        [plugins.streaming.kafka]
            ...
    [plugins.modules]
        ...
```

#### Encoding and decoding streams

ADR-038 introduces the interfaces and types for streaming state changes out from KVStores, associating this
data with their related ABCI requests and responses, and registering a service for consuming this data and streaming it to some destination in a final format.
Instead of prescribing a final data format in this ADR, it is left to a specific plugin implementation to define and document this format.
We take this approach because flexibility in the final format is necessary to support a wide range of streaming service plugins. For example,
the data format for a streaming service that writes the data out to a set of files will differ from the data format that is written to a Kafka topic.

> 

Reviewer: I think we should unify the data format for all external services, especially message queues. Essentially client app should easily connect to RabbitMQ or Redis and expect the same data format.

Reviewer 2: The API already provides unified data by passing along the marshaled `[]byte` data. Adding a constraint like this might present some difficulties. The API needs be flexible to allow authors to choose the format that they want to store data on external systems. I don't see how it can be enforced given that plugin authors have control on how they `process`, `transform`, and `store` the data externally. They may only be interested in specific data stored in a `KVStore`, which can be `JSON`, `Protbuf`, or `String` values.
